title: iPhone 4S
date: 2012-01-12
alias: blog/tech/apple/iphone_revisited.html


Not too long ago, I wrote <a
href="http://www.mschaef.com/blog/tech/apple/ten_months_with_an_iphone.html">a
bit</a> on life with an iPhone 3G.  Since then, Apple has revised the
platform a few times, and I'verecently upgraded to the iPhone 4S.
This makes now as good a time as any to revisit the points in my
earlier post to see what has changed:

<ul>

<li> <b>Touch Screen</b> - The Apple touch screen is about as good as
it gets. The size is a good balance between utility and portability,
the hardware is well executed, and the software is very, very
fluid. That said, there's still the problem that touch screens
eliminate the tactile feedback you get from physical buttons. It's
harder to use the phone when your eyes aren't visually focused on the
display. This limitation is innate to touch screens, but it's still
annoying.

<li> <b>'Ambient Information'</b> - iOS 5 handles notifications much
more nicely than in earlier versions of iOS. However, the homescreen
is still largely dead to ambient information. The only two exceptions
are the numeric badges attached to icons and the calendar icon (which
displays the current date). The clock icon is wrong, the weather is
wrong, and the map is wrong. My hunch is that this is partially to
save on battery life, but given that the iPod nano can keep an analog
clock icon current, some of this limitation seems gratuitous.

<li> <b>Inconvenient Portrait/Landscape Switching</b> - Fixed with a nice lock
facility in the task switcher. (Although I rarely use the lock, so
maybe it wasn't a big problem after all.)

<li> <b>Multiple e-Mail boxes</b> - Fixed in iOS 4 with the unified
mailbox view.

<li> <b>Large e-mails</b> - I'm not honestly sure if this has been
fixed, or if I just get fewer large e-mails, but I haven't noticed
this nearly as much.

<li> <b>Latency</b> - The iPhone 4S is almost completely beyond
reproach. (The latency on my old 3G got <b>terrible</b>, with the
upgrade to iOS 4.0, and the subseuent patches did nothing to correct
it.)

<li> <b>App Store Rejections</b> - There seems to have been less
public drama lately around App Store rejections and policy
changes. However, I'm suspecting it's mainly because Apple has given a
little and developers have come to grudgingly accept the limitations
that Apple still imposes.

<li> <b>App Store</b> - It's grown to 500,000 (!) applications, but
Apple still controls the horizontal and the vertical. Because they
control the way applications are displayed, they have a huge degree of
control over the exposure their ISV's get and the revenues those ISV's
earn.

<li> <b>Keyboard</b> - After over three years, it's still tedious and
error-prone. It works, but just. What's changed in my thinking over
the last couple years is that I no longer care. For me, the iPhone is
almost entirely about content consumption, and the keyboard doesn't
really matter that much.

<li> <b>Industrial Design</b> - I still love the way the phone looks
and feels. What's different for me is that I no longer bother with the
add on case.

</ul>

A couple years ago, this is where I said I wouldn't switch away from
an iPhone. I recently replaced one iPhone with another, so for me,
this is still mostly true; The iPhone has evolved nicely over the
years, and it still fits my needs better than the alternatives.
However, two things have changed in the last few years.  The first is
that there's now a reasonable competitor. Unlike then, the alternative
to iOS isn't Windows Mobile 6.5... the modern alternative, Android,
has a touch screen, a modern web browser, and a fully stocked app
store. Unless Apple sues Android into submission, it has lost these
things as competitive differentiators. 

The second thing that's changed for me in the last couple years is
more personal. As much as I like the iPhone, I can't shake the feeling
that it isn't a net improvement to my overall standard of living. Amy
Breesman said it well when she was recently quoted in an <a
href="http://www.npr.org/templates/transcript/transcript.php?storyId=144146395">NPR
Story</a>: <i>" I would almost say it's, like, a negative effect that
it's had on my life. It's just kind of this rabbit hole that you're
always going down."</i>. Maybe I'd miss it more if it were gone, but I
can't shake the feeling that the time spent on the phone would be
better spent elsewhere.  Then again, I wouldn't have known about that
NPR quotation, unless I had heard it on the NPR app in my phone.
