title: Merry Christmas!
date: 2006-12-26
filename: ./personal/merry_christmas_2006.txt

Well, another Christmas has come and gone. This one was particularly
special for us, since it was both Ryan's first Christmas and our first
Christmas with a child.  Stereotypically for a child on Christmas
morning, Ryan woke us up at 5:30 AM.  However, true to his usual daily
ritual, it was more because he was hungry than because he was excited
about opening gifts. In a few years that will probably reverse
itself. We also expect Ryan to start helping out a little more with
actually opening the gifts.  Since he's not quite five months old he
had a little trouble with the wrapping paper; Mommy and Daddy had to
help out a bit with that part. Once we got the gifts open for him,
we'd show them to Ryan who would then promptly try to eat them. This
worked better for some gifts than for others. :-)

For the majority of Ryan's Christmas, we tried an idea that Teresa
suggested.  Since Ryan's direct involvement in opening his gifts was
limited by his age, we each got some surprise gifts for Ryan, and then
opened the gifts to Ryan from the other parent. This made Christmas
shopping particularly fun and also added to the surprise factor of
Christmas morning. It was fun to see the different perspectives we
brought to Ryan's Christmas: for an example, Daddy got Ryan a space
heater (for bath time in the Philadelphia winter) and Mommy got Ryan a
Leap Frog toy designed to teach farm animal sounds. The toy is
actually really cool, even for adults: farm animals are represented
with plastic blocks labled and colored to match the animal they
represent. The blocks then have punch card like patterns of holes that
signal the type of animal to the farmhouse. This enables the farmhouse
to make the appropriate sounds for each animal.  (The toy has blocks
for three types of animals but a four bit animal encoding scheme that
would allow it to distinguish between 15 different types of
blocks. Daddy is very curious what the other 12 sounds might be.)

In the end, Ryan's most important gift this year was also one of the
smallest.  Due to a possible ear ache a couple weeks ago, Teresa ended
up having to take Ryan to the doctor to have his ear examined.  During
that visit, Teresa asked and got approval for Ryan to start eating
solid foods other than rice cereal. In honor of that newfound
permission, we got Ryan some actual baby food as a stocking stuffer:
two tubs each of green peas and squash.  Christmas afternoon found
Ryan eating away at green peas and absolutely <b>loving</b> them.
Compared to the rice cereal, which is apparantly pretty awful, there's
no comparision at all: Ryan loves his peas. He opened his mouth when
he saw the spoon coming, pulled the spoon towards his mouth, and then
licked the peas off the spoon.  We have pictures and videos we're
going to try to post in the next week or two.

We all hope everybody reading this is having a similarly blessed
Holiday season and has a wonderful New Year!
