title: RentACoder
date: 2006-07-24
alias: blog/tech/general/rent_a_coder.html

I recently had the opportunity (need?) to do some business through the
<a href="http://www.rentacoder.com">RentACoder</a> website. If you're
not familar with RentACoder, it is an online clearinghouse for
contract programming and data entry.  It has an interface for
potential buyers to submit bids and coders to respond with offers to
do the work. If an offer is good enough, it is accepted and payment
funds are kept in escrow by RAC.  While a bid is in progress RAC
provides arbitration services and limited schedule
tracking. Communications between the parties can be done through the
website, in which case they are considered binding by RAC's
arbitration process.

The work I had done through RAC was pretty simple and easy to specify:
extract a specific table from each of 1,200 PDF files and translate it
to CSV format.  The difficulty is that these were scanned PDF files
and not generated with embedded text data, which made it a very manual
process.  Image quality was low enough that OCR software was highly
unreliable.

After dividing the work into 11 phases, I submitted a bid request and
got around 20 bids within a couple days. The bids all ranged between
50-100% of my maximum amount and, with one exception, were entirely
from coders in Pakistan, India, or Romania.  The exception, a guy in
Colorado, backed out as soon as he saw that the PDF files were scanned
rather than textual. If you are an American paying for an American
lifestyle, and are considering offering your services through RAC, you
ought to consider with whom you're competing. You need to be very
specialized or willing to work for low wage rates to be
competitive. From the point of view of a buyer on RAC, the coder could
be located on Mars and it wouldn't really matter all that much: this
is true globalization at work.

Anyway, the rest of my RAC story is that there is no story. Over the
course of about a month, I entered and completed RAC contracts for all
11 phases of work plus a re-entry phase for verification.  Basically
all of the contracts were on time, on budget, and of high quality. RAC
did it's job and there were no problems.  Admittedly, my bids were for
limited, easily specified work, but I'd do it again in a heartbeat.


