Everybody has a theory...

In a <a
href="http://os.newsforge.com/article.pl?sid=06/07/17/1535230">recent
article on newsforge</a> Toby Richards discusses his pet theory
describing why Linux isn't mainstream. You should read the article
yourself (it's short), but the basic gist is that 'people' at home
want to use operating systems that are compatible with what they use
at work, and Linux isn't used at work because there isn't a good
equivalent to Microsoft Outlook. The problem is: this reasoning has
been tried before.

<br><br>

For over a decade, there's always been some mystical missing piece of
technology that was holding Linux back from mainstream acceptance. For
a while personal finance software filled this role, later on it was a
unified desktop, and later still, when KDE and Gnome reached
stability, the need for good office software took up the baton. Fast
forward to 2006 and the "one missing thing Linux needs to become
mainstream" is apparantly a good equivalent to Microsoft Outlook. 

<br><br>

This line of reasoning is seductive to programmers: it basically
transforms the question of "What does Linux need to become
mainstream?" into the question "What code do I need to write?". After
all, if the only thing holding Linux back from mainstream acceptance
is a piece of code, then a missing piece of code is easy for a
programmer to fix. In fact, since 1997 (the last time I ran Linux full
time), basically all of the 'missing pieces' I mentioned above have
been rewritten or created anew. If an integrated graphical desktop
with a functional office suite was really the key to mainstream
acceptance, then Linux should already be there. 10 years ago that was
the belief and 10 years later that belief was basically proven
completely wrong. When was the last time you saw Linux running on
anything other than a server or in some other relatively
fixed-function application? Waving a magic wand and integrating
Evolution with Exchange won't change this any more than any of the
other scapegoats that have taken the blame for Linux's niche status in
the past.

<br><br>

It'd be easy to blame this on changing times: after all, who knew that
Exchange integration would be so key to Linux's mainstream acceptance
a few years ago? Actually, that'd be anybody in IT with a pulse. As
Todd points out, Outlook 97 (<i>"It's nearly a decade old, for crying
out loud."</i>) runs under Wine and provides Exchange integration. Put
another way, the Linux desktop software stack hasn't interoperated
natively with the mainstream PC software vendor's e-mail solution for
over <b>nine years</b>. This isn't a short-term problem: this is
innate. Another example of this kind of long-running problem is the
ongoing trouble finding modern video drivers for X11. As much as
people complain about ATI's lousy video drivers, it's only a repeat of
the same thing that happened with Neomagic and Diamond back in the
mid-90's. The names are different, but the problem and result are
exactly the same: when buying hardware, caveat emptor if you want
modern graphics support.

<br><br>

In both of these cases, it's easy to assign blame to closed
propriatary vendors. You could also argue that it's just a symptom of
OSS developers wanting to work on whatever's 'coolest', rather than
what needs to get done. However, with either explanation the problem
is inherent with open source, and the net effect is the same: Linux
gets most of the way to where it needs to be, but it gets there late
and and fails to go the last mile or two. It's this last mile that's
so important to mainstream acceptance, and getting through it is going
to take a lot more than one or two pieces of code. I have no doubt
that five years from now, Linux will have decent Exchange integration
and excellent support for the ATI R300 graphics in my (then) six year
old laptop.  Too bad the battle for the desktop will have moved on.

