99.0...98.9...98.8...98.7...98.6...

It's been a couple weeks since my last post about Ryan's first fever, 
but I'm pleased to say we got through it without much incident.  The 
doctor's diagnosis was that it was a mild viral infection; This was 
borne out by the ultimate progression of the illness. One of the more 
interesting things we found out during the doctor's visit is that we're 
very lucky that this happened as late after birth as it did. If Ryan had 
come down with a fever in the first two months of life, we would have 
been sent straight to the hospital for a battery of tests, including a 
spinal tap.  They do this in young infants to rule out the possibility 
of latent infections from birth. It's not unheard of for infants to pick 
up a bacterial infection during birth. These infections can remain 
latent for 6-8 weeks and can cause severe complications.  Since Ryan 
came down with his fever three months after birth, this was ruled out by 
definition.

<br><br>

A couple weeks after this little drama, we got our first 'sick child' 
call from Ryan's day care. They noticed oozing from his eye and wanted 
to rule out the possibility of highly infectious conjunctivitis, etc.  
This ended up being a clogged tear duct, but it was good they sent Ryan 
home anyway.  We'd rather them err on the side of safety when it comes 
to sick children. 

<br><br>

To close on a less biological note, Ryan went on his first plane ride 
yesterday.  We flew to Houston as the first stop on our Thanksgiving 
tour of the grandparent's and great-grandparents homes. Despite the fact 
the flight was delayed three hours due to weather, the airplane's flaps 
stuck up, and they had firetrucks waiting for us at Houston's airport 
when we landed, Ryan got through the entire three hour flight without 
being 'that baby' (you know, the baby crying through the whole flight 
and irritating all of the adults).  Actually, Ryan didn't cry at all.  
He was quite the little trooper, and both Mommy and Daddy were very 
proud. Two flights to go this holiday season.
date: 2006-11-17
filename: ./personal/ryan_charles/98_degrees.txt
